Deleting a branch in Git helps clean up completed or unused branches after their changes have been merged.

Removes unnecessary branches from the repository.
Keeps the project organized and manageable.
When to Delete branches
Branches should be deleted once their purpose is fulfilled to keep the Git repository clean and easy to manage.

After a feature or fix is completed and merged.
When a branch is no longer needed for development.
Using Git Commands Locally
Git commands are executed from the local terminal or command prompt to remove a branch from the local repository and, if required, from the remote repository as well.

Step 1: Open Terminal or Command Prompt
Launch your terminal or command prompt application on your local machine.

Step 2: Navigate to Repository
Use the cd command to navigate to the local repository where the branch exists. For example:

cd /path/to/your/repository
Step 3: Switch to a Different Branch
Ensure you are not on the branch you want to delete.

git checkout main
Step 4: Delete the Branch Locally
Use the following Git command to delete the branch locally:

git branch -d branch_name
Replace branch_name with the name of the branch you want to delete. This command will delete the branch from your local repository.

Step 5: Push Deletion to Remote (Optional)
If you want to delete the branch on the remote repository as well, use the following command:

git push origin --delete branch_name
This command will delete the branch named branch_name on the remote repository. Ensure you replace branch_name with the actual name of the branch you want to delete.

Example: Delete a branch named feature-new
Here’s how you can do it using Git commands locally:

1. Open your terminal or command prompt.

2. Navigate to the repository:

cd /path/to/your/repository
3. Check branch:

git branch
Screenshot-2024-04-23-183448
check branch
4. Switch to different branch:

git checkout main
5. Delete the branch locally:

git branch -d feature-new
Screenshot-2024-04-23-183527
delete branch locally
6. Optionally, delete the branch on the remote repository:

git push origin --delete feature-new
Screenshot-2024-04-23-183720
delete branch from remote repositrory
If you 
