Git is a distributed version control system that manages code changes and collaboration, and understanding how Git commands work internally helps developers use Git more confidently and effectively.

Tracks file changes using internal objects, references, and history.
Each Git command (like commit, branch, or merge) operates on these underlying structures.
Every developer has a complete local repository, enabling offline work.
Knowing the internals helps with troubleshooting and efficient Git usage.
Git Concepts
Git Concepts provide the foundational understanding of how Git tracks changes, manages versions, and enables collaboration in software development.

Snapshots vs. Deltas
Git uses a snapshot-based approach by saving the entire project state at each commit instead of file differences.

Unchanged files are linked to previous versions, not duplicated
This makes Git space-efficient, fast, and reliable
Git's Three States
Git operates with three main states that files can reside in:

Modified: Changes have been made to the file but not yet staged.
Staged: Changes are marked to be included in the next commit.
Committed: Changes are safely stored in the local repository.
Git's Architecture
Git’s Architecture is designed around a distributed model that efficiently tracks changes using the working directory, staging area, and repository.

Working Directory: The directory on your computer where you make changes.
Staging Area (Index): An intermediate area where Git tracks changes that will go into your next commit.
Repository: Where Git permanently stores all snapshots and change history.
Git’s Internal Data Structures
Git’s internal data structures are designed to store project data efficiently and accurately track every change made to files over time.

Blob
A Blob (Binary Large Object) stores the actual content of a single file in Git.

Identified by a SHA-1 hash of its content
Same content produces the same blob, regardless of filename or location
Helps Git avoid duplicate storage and save space
Example:

When you add a file to Git, it creates a blob object that stores the file's content:

echo "Hello, World!" > example.txt
git add example.txt
This command creates a blob object, identified by its SHA-1 hash.

Tree
Trees are Git’s way of representing directories. A tree object points to blobs (files) and other trees (subdirectories), thus forming the hierarchical structure of the project.

A tree points to blobs (files) and other trees (subdirectories)
It forms the hierarchical layout of the project
Each commit contains a tree that captures a snapshot of the directory structure
Example: A tree object captures a snapshot of the directory structure at a given commit, with pointers to blobs and other trees.

Commit
A commit object is the most critical data structure in Git represents a project snapshot at a specific point in time.

Stores a snapshot of the working directory
Includes metadata like author and commit message
Points to the previous commit to maintain history
Structure of a Commit Object:

Tree: Points to the top-level tree of the directory structure.
Parent: Refers to the previous commit(s). A commit can have multiple parents in the case of merges.
Author/Committer: Metadata about who made the changes and when.
Message: A description of the changes made.
Git Object Model
Git’s object model defines how data is stored and managed using blobs, trees, commits, and tags, each uniquely identified by a SHA-1 hash.

Hashes and SHA-1
Git uses SHA-1 hashing to ensure the integrity and uniqueness of all repository objects.

Each object (blob, tree, commit) has a 40-character SHA-1 hash
The hash is generated from the object’s content
This prevents tampering and ensures reliable identification and retrieval
Example:

git hash-object example.txt
This command outputs the SHA-1 hash of the file content, which is how Git identifies and stores the file internally.

Object Storage
Git stores data as objects inside the .git/objects directory, organized using SHA-1 hashes for efficient access.

The first two characters of the SHA-1 hash form a subdirectory
The remaining characters are used as the object filename
This structure enables fast storage and retrieval of Git objects
Commit Management in Git
Commit Management in Git refers to how Git records, organizes, and tracks snapshots of project changes to maintain a clear and reliable version history.

When you make a commit in Git, it performs several steps under the hood:

Creating Blobs: Git creates blobs for each file that has been added or modified.
Building Trees: It then creates tree objects representing the directory structure.
Generating a Commit: Finally, a commit object is created that links to the top-level tree object and the previous commit.
Commits form a chain, where each commit points to its parent(s), creating a linear or branched history of changes.

Branches and Tags in Git
Branches in Git are pointers to commits. A branch essentially points to a commit and moves forward as new commits are added.

Branches Work
Creating a Branch: When you create a new branch, Git creates a pointer to the current commit.
Switching Branches: Switching branches updates the working directory and staging area to match the branch’s commit.
Tags: Tags are another type of reference in Git, used to mark specific commits, often for releases or important milestones. Unlike branches, tags do not move—they point to a specific commit permanently.

The Role of the Index (Staging Area)
The index, or staging area, is an intermediate state that allows you to build up a commit piece by piece. It stores information about what will go into your next commit, letting you control the granularity of your changes.

How the Index Works?
Staging Changes: When you use git add, changes are moved to the index.
Committing: Running git commit captures the current state of the index as a new commit.
Understanding Git Refs
Refs, or references, are pointers that help Git keep track of commits, branches, and tags. They are stored in the .git/refs directory.

Types of Refs
Heads: These are refs for branches (e.g., .git/refs/heads/main).
Tags: Stored in .git/refs/tags.
Remotes: References to remote branches, stored in .git/refs/remotes.
Git’s Garbage Collection and Cleanup
Git repositories can accumulate unreferenced objects, such as commits from deleted branches. Git uses garbage collection to clean up these objects and optimize repository size.

Garbage Collection in Git
Git’s garbage collection can be triggered manually using:
git gc
This command cleans up unnecessary files and optimizes the repository.
Reflog and Expiry allow Git to track reference changes and recover lost commits.
Reflog records the history of ref updates over time
Unreferenced commits are eventually removed by garbage collection if not recovered
I
