Git is a distributed version control system for tracking file changes, while GitHub is a cloud platform for hosting Git repositories and enabling collaboration. Installing Git is required to use both for version control.

Installing Git on Windows
We will install git on Windows through the official Git website, which is the easy and most recommended way. The following steps are for installing the git on Windows.

Step 1: Download the Installer
Go to the official Git website: https://git-scm.com/downloads/win

gitwindows0
The download will start automatically for the latest version of Git for Windows. After the download is complete, run the .exe file.

Step 2: Select Editor & Adjust Path
Follow the prompts in the setup wizard. Most default settings will be fine for general use, but here are some key steps:

Firstly, the installer will ask which text editor to use for Git. You can choose from options like Vim, Notepad++, or Visual Studio Code.
Make sure you choose the option that adds Git to your system PATH (recommended for ease of use in the command line).
Select the default option (OpenSSL) to allow Git to communicate securely over HTTPS.
The default choice, “Checkout Windows-style, commit Unix-style line endings,” is ideal for most developers working in Windows environments.
Step 3: Complete the Installation
After configuring the setup, click "Install" and allow the installation to complete.

Once done, you can launch Git Bash (installed with Git) or use Git from the Command Prompt (cmd) by typing the following command.

git --version
Screenshot-2025-03-03-101941
Git
If Git is installed, it will display the version number.

Installing Git on Linux
Step 1: Update the System
For Debian/Ubuntu:

sudo apt update
sudo apt install git
For Fedora:

sudo dnf install git
For Arch Linux:

sudo pacman -S git
Step 2: Verify Installation
Use the below command to varify the installation of Git in Ubuntu.

git --version
version
Installing Git on Mac
Step 1: Get Homebrew in your macOS
If you don't have Homebrew, then type the following command in the terminal:

/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL
 https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
git-11
Step 2: Install Brew
We recommend you install Homebrew first and then run the below command to download Git with no errors:

brew install git
git-22
Step 3: Verify the Installation
Once the installation is complete, verify the installation:

git --version
git-33
Setting Up GitHub with Git
Step 1: Create a GitHub Account
Visit GitHub and sign up.
Screenshot-2025-03-03-112007
Github
Step 2: Configure Git with GitHub
Run the following commands in the terminal (Windows Git Bash, Linux, or Mac Terminal):

git config --global user.name "YourName"
git config --global user.email "youremail@example.com"
Step 3: Generate SSH Key (Optional but Recommended)
ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -C "youremail@example.com"
Copy the key:
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
Add it to GitHub > Settings > SSH and GPG keys.
Step 4: Create a New Repository
Screenshot-2025-03-03-112509
New Repository
Now we have successfully setup GitHub in our system.

