Working with files and directories is a fundamental skill in any command-line environment. It helps you efficiently navigate projects, manage source code, and maintain systems across different platforms.

Create, list, move, and remove files or directories using standard commands.
Use Unix-like tools available in Linux, macOS, and Git Bash on Windows.
Manage project files effectively while working with Git and repositories.
Changing Directories
Navigating between directories allows you to move through the file system hierarchy. This is done using the cd (change directory) command.

Move into a Directory
This command changes the current working directory to /home/user/Documents.

cd /home/user/Documents
Move to the Parent Directory
This moves you one level up to the parent directory.

cd ..
Creating Files and Directories
Creating files and folders helps organize your work efficiently.

Creating Files
The touch command is used to create an empty file.

touch myfile.txt
This creates a file named myfile.txt in the current directory.

Creating Directories
Directories are created using the mkdir (make directory) command.

mkdir my_directory
This creates a new directory called my_directory.

Listing Directory Contents
To see files and directories inside a folder, use the ls command.

Basic Listing
Lists files and directories in the current directory.

ls
Detailed Listing
Displays file permissions, ownership, size, and modification date.

ls -l
Show Hidden Files
Shows hidden files (files starting with .).

ls -a
Combined Options
Displays detailed information for all files, including hidden ones.

ls -la
Listing Files Tracked by Git
Before modifying or removing files in a Git repository, it’s useful to know what Git is tracking.

git ls-files
This command lists all files currently tracked by Git in the repository.

Removing Files and Directories in Git
Git provides commands to safely remove files and directories while keeping version history consistent.

Removing a File
git rm filename
This removes the file from the working directory and stages the removal for the next commit.

Removing a Directory
git rm -r directoryname
The -r (recursive) option removes the directory along with all its contents.

Remove from Git but Keep Locally
git rm --cached filename
This removes the file from Git tracking but keeps it in your local file system.

Copying Directories Using Git Bash
Git Bash includes standard Unix utilities like cp and mv, making it useful beyond Git operations.

Copy a Directory
cp -r /path/to/source_directory /path/to/destination_directory
cp copies files or directories
-r enables recursive copying
The destination’s parent directory must already exist
If the destination directory exists, the source directory is copied inside it as a subdirectory.

Moving Directories Using Git Bash
Directories can be moved or renamed using the mv command.

mv /path/to/source_directory /path/to/destination_directory
The source directory is removed from its original location
If the destination exists, the directory is moved inside it
To overwrite an existing directory, it must be deleted first
